You will come back and this lecture we are going to do a quick overview of the SAS force case study.
We're going to go over the some of the early calculations that we need to make as well as the economics
of a single salesperson.
Now for a SAS company we're going to look at an example that is pretty common place in this space which
is in order to grow and sell are going to have to have a sales team and you're going to need a sales
person you're going to look at the actual economics around a single sales person.
How quickly does it take them to ramp up.
You know there's a learning curve.
You've got to account for things like sales attrition maybe there's firings for the salespeople that
don't cut it.
And also there are some that are going to is going to quit.
Right.
And when you look at your overall growth it's really going to be pegged to how quickly you can hire
your sales team and grow your sales team.
OK.
So let's take first though look at some of the market calculations at least in terms of what would it
costs for us to get a qualified lead.
So what do we mean by a qualified lead in the SAS base.
Customers aren't just going to show up on your website and then buy it.
It's an inexpensive product and it's going to take a really high touch sales process.
So they're not just going to show up on your Web site and buy them and show up on your Web site fill
out some sort of an intake form request an initial call and then after the initial call they may set
up a demo and they may even get a trial or something like that.
So here I just want to separate that and get that in your head where qualified leads are the ones that
basically are ready to make a purchase there.
And it's for the sales person to take them from qualified leads to becoming a paying customer.
Now what happens between someone that's just showing up to the Web site and becoming qualified lead.
There's a lot of things that can happen in between.
We're just going to assume that there's stuff going on.
Maybe they need to set up appointments maybe they need to have a sales call but unqualified leads will
define as folks that are just showing up on site.
They're just visitors.
Not all of them are going to become qualified leads.
OK.
So when we think of it that way we can pretty quickly estimate costs per qualified lead.
Kate this is going to be the number that we're going to use for estimating what is the cost of sales
for every customer that gets converted because every customer that gets converted is going to require
a certain amount of leads and as good as your sales team's going to be they're not going to be 100 percent
at converting.
Depending on what industry it's in something like five to 10 percent are pretty good conversion rates
of converting qualified leads into customers so it could mean 10 or more qualified leads before you
get one customer.
OK.
So here we're just going to do a calculation for what it costs to get a qualified lead.
All right.
So let's start here.
What is the breakdown between organic traffic and paid traffic.
This is assuming that organic traffic is free.
People are just fining you guys from word of mouth from search.
You know if you're content marketing whatever it is but you're not paying for it get paid.
Traffic is more common in the space.
So if we are assuming that there's some cost paid per visitor this could be like your CPC cost from
the ad campaign.
Right.
Your cost per visitor to your site.
OK.
Now if we take the weighted average between organic and pay traffic we're going to get this cost per
visitor because some of it is free.
Right.
And then for the visitors then what percentage of the visitors become unqualified leads are the ones
that just show up and leave.
You wouldn't call them leads but maybe some of them a small percentage of them want to sign up for an
initial call then of those that become unqualifiedly.
You know maybe the set up a call what percentage of those actually become qualified leads.
So after the call they still have an interest they're very interested.
They want to have a demo.
They want to have a call with the sales person who's going to give them the full full options and walk
through all the details of why the products to me a perfect fit for them.
OK.
So if we make some assumptions around that then we can estimate how many unqualified leads are needed
to become a qualified lead to get one qualified.
So based on the assumption here that we need.
And then how many visitors will we need to get one qualified.
Well we can back it from this calculation here.
And to have four on qualified leads to get one qualified lead then four and then we need it to only
2 percent become qualified leads that means 2 percent of 200 visitors would end up getting one qualified
lead right.
So then when we have that we can get it estimated costs of the number of visitors that is required to
get one qualified lead times the cost per visitor which is here 150.
So that becomes $300 per qualified lead.
Now we're going to be using this in our later parts of our model.
So the next thing to understand before we actually dive into the model that you're used to seeing is
we need to look at the economics of a single salesperson and you know this work sheet here if you just
work on this and understand this you're going to have a much better understanding of the SAS model and
why it takes a lot more money and a lot more time before you start turning a profit here.
Let's make some assumptions about the salesperson.
Right.
The salesperson is going to have a base salary and a performance salary where this is going to depend
on whether they are meeting their quotas.
OK.
You know there's going be some overhead for the salesperson.
Right.
They need a desk they need need phones they need to have meals an entertainment budget maybe to take
some potential qualified leads out and we can also assume that their salary is going to be growing and
also their expenses the overhead will get more expensive over time as well.
Here we're going to get an assumption around how many leads does it take to get one customer right.
If out of 100 leads they get 8 customers.
8 percent conversion rate.
Then it takes 12 and a half leads for every conversion.
Okay.
And those costs prequalified lead where we calculated that from earlier.
Some other assumptions.
What is the average annual contract value right over customer.
So every time a salesperson makes a sale and converts a customer what does the annual contract value.
We're assuming an expensive pretty expensive kind of middle of the road not now among the most expensive
some SAS solutions are like 150 250000 or even up to a million a year.
This is kind of like low middle range or right.
So 50 000 a year and the salesperson has a quarter of 1 million.
So that means they need to do 20 customers 20 conversions in a year.
And let's assume that there's a gross margins of 80 percent on the sales and then that there's also
going to be a price increase per year of 3 percent.
Okay we're going to call it price increase.
This is the price of the software assuming that it's going to get more expensive.
Now some other things to consider is the preferred salary.
Eventually it's going to depend on whether they are operating at their full productivity if they're
meeting their quotas right.
But maybe for the salespeople initially if you give them an opportunity to you know ramp up.
So what can happen is maybe hey look for the performance base you know the first three months of the
first four months is you get a 50 percent draw on that.
So here I said it so that the first four months has a 50 percent draw on average over the first four
months is 50 percent.
But going from 100 down what this means is hey month 1 regardless of their sales they're going to get
100 percent of the performance.
It's much too regardless of scale to get 65 percent.
And then three of those sales we get 35 percent.
And then after that is to me all performance space.
Right.
But this averages out to 50 percent over the first four months.
So basically I have a few months to kind of ramp up now.
These are kind of similar to what we've done before.
Right.
These are two track sales attrition.
This is a sales team basically.
But you know as a single sales person it's kind of weird to think about this but I want to put it here
because when we started thinking about whole team we're definitely going to have to account for attrition.
So this this could capture everything from like getting fired from leaving from going on vacation whatever
it is that takes down their sales potential or productivity during those months.
OK.
So we may start off with something like a high sales attrition early on and then stabilizing at a rate
after some time and then churn is going to be the loss of customers.
So this is to me the last in the actual recurring revenue that's being collected.
Okay.
So let me start with the higher churn and then hopefully stabilize some sort of a lower churn.
And then here is the productivity curve.
This is basically hey how quickly can the ramp up to operating at full their full sales potential.
You know 100 percent means they're meeting 100 percent of the quota and then productivity curve of 10
means you know they're only meeting 10 percent of their sales quota.
So we're going to say hey and there when they're going to start off with only doing 10 percent of their
quota and it takes them four months to ramp up to 100 percent four months we'll match kind of this draw
down because by the fourth month they're going to get zero of the performance draw.
That's just given they're going to have to earn it after that completely.
OK.
So we start off with the productivity curve where starts at 10 percent and then ramping up to 100 percent
after four months.
So starting in the fifth month I get 200 percent.
And we also have sales attrition that's based on this information here.
And then we have the customer churn That's from this great here.
Now bookings annual contract value All right so fear is going to be the actual contract value that they
book in that month.
But remember we're going to assume that this is going to be collect it monthly.
So that's the annual contract value.
But that's not what is actually going to be collected so we're going to have to do some adjustments
there right.
But this is just a booking contract value that's come in in that month.
Okay.
The sales attrition we're going to take off some of that sales and then the net bookings then will be
the annual contract value of the bookings from that month minus the sales attrition.
So that's that's pretty clear.
Then the actual monthly recurring revenue was actually build is going to be the net bookings divided
by 12.
The net bookings from that month divided by 12.
Okay.
And then that's the net monthly recurring revenue just from the bookings from that month.
But in order for us to track the actual Billings on a month to month basis we have to keep track of
all the previous monthly recurring revenue.
Okay.
So that's what this one is here.
We track the previous recurring revenue and then and then the churn is what we lose from the customers
from the previous recurring revenues right.
So the churn is based on the previous Emma.
Ours are monthly recurring revenues that the total actual monthly recurring revenue is going to be the
new monthly recurring revenue plus the old monthly recurring revenue minus the churn that happens on
the previous recurring revenue.
So then we have the actual monthly recurring revenue here that's happening.
So then when we have that we can also look at the cumulative billings for the sales person over time.
It's going to keep building up rates to get better over time.
The pricing gets higher they're at their full productivity their monthly recurring revenue for months
can grow and then their total is going to cumulative Billings is going to grow obviously for sure.
And then the gross profit is just going to be the cumulative Billings but minus the costs the gross
costs here.
So that means the profit is just going to be the gross margins times the Billings.
So that's kind of the revenue the Billings revenue side and prophesied for a single sales person.
Okay but then let's take a look at the expenses right.
Expenses primarily is income from their salary.
Okay.
So couple of things we need to track.
We have the expense growth rate that's for their overhead because that's going to grow over time.
We have their salary raise because it's going to grow over time as well.
And then we also have the performance salary draw.
So initially the base salary is just going to be base salary you know.
And then over time it grows that the raise whatever's being raised at those 3 percent grows a year from
now and it goes up.
Okay.
But the performance salary it's going to take the higher of the performance strawe or their productivity.
Right.
So initially the guaranteed draw is higher so they're going to get more of that.
And second month that's still better than you know their productivity so they're still getting more
of that third month.
This one is better.
They're actually their performance is outstripping the minimum guaranteed.
So it's going to be calling from here now and then moving forward calling from there and then so on
and so forth.
Okay.
Now then the overhead overhead is just the overhead costs here divided by Also monthly and then is growing
at the expense growth rate.
So initially at that rate.
And then over time it grows in each year after that.
Okay.
So that one's pretty straightforward then the other thing is then we have the cost of leads right.
So the cost of leads is going to be the total the actual annual contract value divided by the average
contract value times the number of leads needed for that number of conversions times the cost per lead.
So that's what that calculation.
And then it gives us the total cost of the leads for the sales person to in order to meet that sales
schedule that is calculated here.
That's the cost of all the leads.
So we added all of these costs here we have the total expenses.
And then when we look at Billings plus the total expenses we have the cash flow and the net profit so
when we look at this we can then calculate when a salesperson actually starts to break even when they
start to pull in more from their billings than the cost of of them operating as a salesperson right.
So based on their assumptions here we have something like a break even in months 6.
Then after that there are going higher and higher on a cumulative basis though you know we're going
to operate at a loss for a while right before actually before there's a payback.
Right.
And the full payback is when to come here.
So then when we do this we can also calculate what is the max cash deficit for a single salesperson
as well.
So one thing that's useful is when we look up the bookings for the total bookings here versus the churn
you're going to see something like this for a salesperson.
So initially it's going to ramp up pretty quick.
I mean the growth starts to slow down for the for the bookings but the churn will get higher as their
total books get bigger as they have more and more clients.
You know even if at the churn that stays a flat percentage rate from a larger base of customers that
that's going to start to increase over time then here's one where it is the monthly recurring revenue
versus expenses.
So expenses ramp up and then kind of it's pretty stable.
It's growing slowly right now but over time you know as the salesperson gets better their monthly recurring
revenue that they're generating is going to keep increasing and outpacing the expenses.
But what that means is there is an initial period where you're going to be cash flow negative on a salesperson.
Right.
So this right here is looking at it kind of over the first three years.
But I can zoom in a little bit.
You know maybe we will zoom in and just look at just maybe the first two years instead of the whole
three years.
So I'm just going to update the chart real quick so you can see what that looks like.
All right.
So we're looking at the first two years there's a cumulative profits from a single salesperson.
We see that you know there's a max loss around the fifth month and then it starts to pick up and turn
around and then we start you get your money back on your investment return on your investment on a single
salesperson here in month 9 and then after that it's all gravy after that.
When you look at something like this if we change some of the other assumptions the product is not that
expensive and maybe the quota is lower.
They're not able to do that.
Well you know and and you're converting 5 percent.
Well if that's the case then it's going to take longer to reach.
It's going to take much longer of an investment curve if you're paying them.
Same with the same compensation and you have the same training.
But that's what your product is that you can see that you know for a single salesperson each salesperson
is going to take you a while before you really get your investment back.
We're going to change some of those things back just for our example for the next one.
So that's the economics of a single salesperson what's coming up is well what happens now if we start
to hire a lot more people.